# Analysis of the Effectiveness of Face-Coverings on the Death Rate of COVID-19 Using Machine Learning

## Project Goal:
The recent outbreak of the COVID-19 shocked humanity leading to the death of millions of people worldwide. To stave off the spread of the virus, the authorities in the US, employed different strategies including the mask mandate (MM) order issued by the states' governors. Although most of the previous studies pointed in the direction that MM can be effective in hindering the spread of viral infections, the effectiveness of MM in reducing the degree of exposure to the virus and, consequently, death rates remains indeterminate. Indeed, the extent to which the degree of exposure to COVID-19 takes part in the lethality of the virus remains unclear. In the current work, we defined a parameter called the average death ratio as the monthly average of the ratio of the number of daily deaths to the total number of daily cases. We utilized survey data provided by New York Times to quantify people's abidance to the MM order. Additionally, we implicitly addressed the extent to which people abide by the MM order that may depend on some parameters like population, income, and political inclination. Using different machine learning classification algorithms we investigated how the decrease or increase in death ratio for the counties in the US West Coast correlates with the input parameters. Our results showed a promising score as high as 0.94 with algorithms like XGBoost, Random Forest, and Naive Bayes. To verify the model, the best performing algorithms were then utilized to analyze other states (Arizona, New Jersey, New York and Texas) as test cases. The findings show an acceptable trend, further confirming usability of the chosen features for prediction of similar cases.

## Data Resources:


## Results:

## Conclusion:
In this body of work, we have analyzed the effect of mask covering on the intensity of spread of the COVID-19 virus by considering the death ratio at the county level to be the
primary indicator. To bridge the gap between level of adherence to mask mandate, four main features are used as input data, population, income, political inclination, and the results of the survey on mask usage from New York Times. The change in the death ratio is used as the metric to quantify the effectiveness of face-coverings on the COVID-19 spread. After extracting and refining the data-set from reliable sources, we analyzed the information using 9 different algorithms. Among all the methods used, Random Forest, XGBoost, and Naive Bayes had the best performance with a classification accuracy of 94%. The high performing algorithms, with the computed hyper-parameters, are then used to process four additional states, Arizona, New Jersey, New York, and Texas entirely used as test data set. The acceptable accuracy results for the large test case, further verifies legibility of the chosen features as influential criteria for modeling purposes. The obtained hyper-parameters for these models (except for Naive Bayes) can now be used to predict future conditions of the spread of the virus. It is shown that, in most of the counties, there exist a connection between adherence to the mask mandate and change in death ratio. The findings of this work emphasizes importance of immediate legislative action on well-being of societies. It is hoped that the findings of this work, highlight importance of socioeconomic and political settings on behavior of different communities, which as portrayed could be complex and counter-intuitive. For instance, if the mask mandate had been issued earlier, with better implementation procedures along with effective incentives targetted at specific communities, more people would be encouraged to abide by the issued ordinance, and consequently, fewer individuals and families would have become the victim of the pandemic.
